# 2-1 Insertion sort on small arrays in merge sort

> Although merge sort runs in $\Theta(n \lg n)$ worst-case time and insertion sort runs in $\Theta (n^2)$ worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort can make it faster in practice for small problem sizes on many machines. Thus it makes sense to **coarsen** the leaves of the recursion by using insertion sort within merge sort when subproblems become sufficiently small. Consider a modification to merge sort in which $n/k$ sublists of length $k$ are sorted using insertion sort and then merged using the standard merging mechanism, where $k$ is a value to be determined.
>
> **a**. Show that insertion sort can sort the $n/k$ sublists, each of length k, in $\Theta (nk)$ worst-case time.
>
> **b**. Show how to merge the sublists in $\Theta (n \lg (n/k))$ worst-case time.
>
> **c**. Given that the modified alogotithm runs in $\Theta (nk+n \lg (n/k))$ worst-case time, what is the largest value of k as a function of n for which the modified algorithm has the same running time as standard merge sort, in terms of $\Theta$-notation?
>
> **d**. How should you choose k in practice?

## **a**

Each sublists of length can be sorted in $\Theta (k^2)$, there are n/k sublists, so in n $n/k \cdot \Theta(k^2) = \Theta (nk)$ sorst-case time.

## **b**

Each level of merging need to merge $n$ elements, and there are $\lg (n/k)$levels(since we merge each two sublists in one in each level). So the worse-case time to merge the sublists is $\Theta (n \lg (n/k))$.

## **c**

$$
\begin{aligned}
  &  if \quad \Theta (nk+n \lg (n/k)) = \Theta (n \lg n)\cr
  & \exist  \quad c_{1} , c_{2} , n_{0} \quad satisfies:\cr
  &  c_{1}(n \lg n) \leq nk+n \lg (n/k) \leq c_{2}(n \lg n) \quad for \quad n > n_{0}\cr
    &(c_{1}-1)(\lg n )\leq k - \lg k \leq (c_{2}-1)(\lg n ) \quad for \quad n > n_{0}\cr
   & since \quad lg k \llless k, \quad \text{we have } k = \Theta (\lg n)\cr
\end{aligned}
$$

## **d**

Choose k be the largest size of the sublists that **insertion-sort** is faster than **merge-sort**.
