# 5-1 Probabilistic counting

> With a $b$-bit counter, we can ordinarily only count up to $2^{b}-1$. With R.Morris's probabilistic counting, we can count up to a much larger value at the expense of some loss of precision.
>
> We let a counter value of i represent a count of $n_{i}$ for $i=0,1,...,2^{b}-1$, where the $n_{i}$ form an increasing sequence of nonnegative values. We assume that the initial value of the counter is $0$, representing a count of $n_{0}=0$. The **INCREMENT** operation works on a counter containing the value $i$ in a probabilistic manner. If $i=2^{b}-1$, then the operation reports an overflow error. Otherwise, the **INCREMENT** operation increases the counter by $1$ with probability $1/(n_{i+1}-n_{i})$, and it leaves the counter unchanged with probability $1-1/(n_{i+1}-n_{i})$.
>
> If we select $n_{i}=i$ for all $i \geq 0$, then the counter is an ordinary one. More interesting situations arise if we select, say, $n_{i}=2^{i-1}$ for $i>0$ or $n_{i}=F_{i}$ (the $i$th Fibonacci number—see equation (3.31) on page 69).
>
> For this problem, assume that $n_{2^{b}-1}$ is large enough that the probability of an overflow error is negligible.
>
> **a**. Show that the expected value represented by the counter after $n$ **INCREMENT** operations have been performed is exactly $n$.
>
> **b**. The analysis of the variance of the count represented by the counter depends on the sequence of the $n_{i}$. Let us consider a simple case: $n_{i}=100i$ for all $i\geq 0$. Estimate the variance in the value represented by the register after $n$ **INCREMENT** operations have been performed.

## **a**

Let $I_i$ be the value incresed in the $i$th **INCREMENT** operations, $V$ be the value represented by the counter.

$$
\begin{aligned}
    I_i
    & =
    \begin{cases}
        n_{j+1}-n_{j} & \text{ with probablity of } \frac{1}{n_{j+1}-n_{j}}\cr
        0 & \text{ with probablity of } 1-\frac{1}{n_{j+1}-n_{j}}
    \end{cases}\cr
    E[V]
    & = E\left[\sum_{i=1}^{n} I_i\right]\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n} E[I_i]\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n} 1\cr
    & = n\cr
\end{aligned}
$$

## **b**

$$
\begin{aligned}
    Pr(V=100i)
    & = {n\choose i}p^i(1-p)^{n-i}\quad i=0,1,2,3..,n\cr
    V/100 & \text{ satisfies binomial distribution}\cr
    D[V]
    & = 10000np(1-p)\cr
    & = 99n\cr
\end{aligned}
$$
