# 5-2 Searching an unsorted array

> This problem examines three algorithms for searching for a value $x$ in an unsorted array $A$ consisting of $n$ elements.
>
> Consider the following randomized strategy: pick a random index $i$ into $A$. If $A[i] = x$, then terminate; otherwise, continue the search by picking a new random index into $A$. Continue picking random indices into $A$ until you find an index $j$ such that $A[j] = x$ or until every element of $A$ has been checked. This strategy may examine a given element more than once, because it picks from the whole set of indices each time.
>
> **a**. Write pseudocode for a procedure **RANDOM-SEARCH** to implement the strategy above. Be sure that your algorithm terminates when all indices into $A$ have been picked.
>
> **b**. Suppose that there is exactly one index $i$ such that $A[i] = x$. What is the expected number of indices into $A$ that must be picked before $x$ is found and **RANDOM-SEARCH** terminates?
>
> **c**. Generalizing your solution to part (b), suppose that there are $k\geq 1$ indices $i$ such that $A[i] = x$. What is the expected number of indices into $A$ that must be picked before $x$ is found and **RANDOM-SEARCH** terminates? Your answer should be a function of $n$ and $k$.
>
> **d**. Suppose that there are no indices $i$ such that $A[i] = x$. What is the expected number of indices into $A$ that must be picked before all elements of $A$ have been checked and **RAMDON-SEARCH** terminates?
>
> Now consider a deterministic linear search algorithm. The algorithm, which we call **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**, searches $A$ for $x$ in order, considering $A[i],A[2],A[3],...,A[n]$ until either it finds $A[i] = x$ or it reaches the end of the array. Assume that all possible permutations of the input array are equally likely.
>
> **e**. Suppose that there is exactly one index $i$ such that $A[i] = x$. What is the average-case running time of **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**? What is the worst-case running time of **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**?
>
> **f**. Generalizing your solution to part (e), suppose that there are $k\geq 1$ indices $i$ such that $A[i] = x$. What is the average-case running time of **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**? What is the worst-case running time of **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**? Your answer should be a function of $n$ and $k$.
>
> **g**. Suppose that there are no indices $i$ such that $A[i] = x$. What is the average-case running time of **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**? What is the worst-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?
>
> Finally, consider a randomized algorithm **SCRAMBLE-SEARCH** that first randomly permutes the input array and then runs the deterministic linear search given above on the resulting permuted array.
>
> **h**. Letting $k$ be the number of indices $i$ such that $A[i] = x$, give the worst-case and expected running times of **SCRAMBLE-SEARCH** for the cases in which $k = 0$ and $k = 1$. Generalize your solution to handle the case in which $k \geq 1$.
>
> **i**. Which of the three searching algorithms would you use? Explain your answer.

## **a**

```cpp
RANDOM-SEARCH(x, A, n)
    S = ∅
    while |S| != n
        i = RAMDOM(1,n)
        if A[i] == x
            return i
        else
            S = S ∪ {i}
    return NIL
```

## **b**

Let $D$ be the number of indices into $𝐴$ that must be picked before $x$ is found and **RANDOM-SEARCH** terminates.

$$
\begin{aligned}
    Pr(D = i)
    & = (\frac{n-1}{n})^{i-1}\cdot\frac{1}{n}\cr
    E[D]
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n} i Pr(D=i)\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n} i (\frac{n-1}{n})^{i-1}\cdot\frac{1}{n}\cr
    & = n \quad \text{(Geometric distribution)}\cr
\end{aligned}
$$

## **c**

$$
\begin{aligned}
    p
    & = \frac{k}{n}\cr
    Pr(D = i)
    & = p(1-p)^i\cr
    E[D]
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n} i Pr(D=i)\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n} ip(1-p)^{i-1}\cr
    & = \frac{1}{p}\cr
    & = \frac{n}{k}\cr
\end{aligned}
$$

## **d**

Let $X_i$ be the number of indices into $A$ that need to pick the new $i$th indice. precisely speaking, Let $j$ be the the number of indices into $A$ that pick the new $(i-1)$ indice, $k$ be the the number of indices into $A$ that pick the new $i$ indice, then $X_i = k-j$

$$
\begin{aligned}
    E[X_i]
    & = \frac{n}{n-i+1}\cr
    E\left[\sum_{i=1}^{n}X_i\right]
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n}E[X_i]\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n}\frac{n}{n-i+1}\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{n}\frac{n}{i}\cr
    & = n(\ln n + O(1))\cr
\end{aligned}
$$

## **e**

worse-case: n; average-case: (n+1)/2(obviouly).

## **f**

worse-case: n-k+1;

average-case:

$$
\begin{aligned}
    Pr(X=i)
    & = \frac{P(n-k,i-1)P(k,1)P(n-i,n-i)}{P(n,n)}\cr
    Pr(X \geq i)
    & = \prod_{j=1}^{i-1}\frac{n-k-j+1}{n-j+1}\cr
    & = \frac{P(n-k,i-1)}{P(n,i-1)}\cr
    & = \frac{P(n-i+1,k)}{P(n,k)}\cr
    & = \frac{n-i+1\choose k}{n\choose k}\cr
    E[X]
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{i=n-k+1} iPr(X=i)\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{i=n-k+1} Pr(X\geq i)\cr
    & = \sum_{i=1}^{i=n-k+1} \frac{n-i+1\choose k}{n\choose k}\cr
    & = \frac{\sum_{i=k}^{n}{i\choose k}}{n\choose k}\cr
    & = \frac{n+1\choose k+1}{n\choose k}\cr
    & = \frac{n+1}{k+1}\cr
\end{aligned}
$$

## **g**

Both are $n$

## **h**

The same as **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**, only we replace "average-case" with "expected".

## **i**

**DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH**, since it gives best worse-case and average-case running time. **DCRAMBLE-SEARCH** gives the same running time but with extra cost of linear time to permute the input array. In the same time, **DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH** has scanned the full array and reported a result.
