# 7-1 Hoare partition correctness

> The version of **PARTITION** given in this chapter is not the original partitioning algorithm. Here is the original partitioning algorithm, which is due to C.A.R.Hoare.
>
> ```cpp
> HOARE-PARTITION(A,p,r)
> x = A[p]
> i = p-1
> j = r+1
> while TRUE
>   repeat
>       j = j - 1
>   until A[j] ≤ x
>   repeat
>       i = i + 1
>   until A[i] ≥ x
>   if i < j
>       exchange A[i] with A[j]
>   else return j
> ```
>
> **a**. Demonstrate the operation of **HOARE-PARTITION** on the array $A = <13,19,9,5,12,8,7,4,11,2,6,21>$, showing the values of the array and the indices $i$ and $j$ after each iteration of the while loop in lines 4313.
>
> **b**. Describe how the PARTITION procedure in Section 7.1 differs from HOARE-PARTITION when all elements in $A[p:r]$ are equal. Describe a practical advantage of **HOARE-PARTITION** over PARTITION for use in quicksort.
>
> The next three questions ask you to give a careful argument that the procedure **HOARE-PARTITION** is correct. Assuming that the subarray $A[p:r]$ contains at least two elements, prove the following:
>
> **c**. The indices $i$ and $j$ are such that the procedure never accesses an element of $A$ outside the subarray $A[p:r]$
>
> **d**. When **HOARE-PARTITION** terminates, it returns a value $j$ such that $p \leq j < r$.
>
> **e**. Every element of $A[p:j]$ is less than or equal to every element of $A[j+1:r]$ when **HOARE-PARTITION** terminates.
>
> The **PARTITION** procedure in Section 7.1 separates the pivot value (originally in $A[r]$) from the two partitions it forms. The **HOARE-PARTITION** procedure, on the other hand, always places the pivot value (originally in $A[p]$) into one of the two partitions $A[p:j]$ and $A[j+1:r]$. Since $p\leq j < r$, neither partition is empty.
>
> **f**. Rewrite the **QUICKSORT** procedure to use **HOARE-PARTITION**.

## **a**
